The Joe Rogan experience. Now,
now measuring it in humans is, I mean, there's this concept of people.
I'm an emotional person. Mm-hmm, <affirmative>, you know, I'm emotional.
Like people, I get emotional, like people love to say, yeah, those,
those kind of things. What are,
is it possible to measure varying ease of emotional
response in terms of like how it's affecting a person physiologically,
whether or not these emotional responses are physiological or whether
you've gone down a well grooved,
psychological path that you've been sort of participating in your whole
life so that you have these sort of triggers, this happens. And then up,
I'm gonna, I'm gonna start crying. This happens up,
I'm gonna get angry and people sort of fall into those paths without
self-reflection,
without this ability to be objective and introspective and go,
why am I reacting this way? Mm-hmm <affirmative> like what?
Maybe you should stop being so emotional Joe. Right.
And anybody he ever said that to you. <laugh>.
Uh, I guess my wife has said, <laugh> sure.
Well, what does that mean? Like what, you know what I mean? Like the, this,
the varying degrees of emotional response and whether or not those are
beneficial or whether or not they de detract from your experience or inhibit
your, your ability to be productive.
So, you know, I, it really nailed a lot of interesting stuff in there.
And I, um, you know, it's a very kind of deep analysis of, of what's going on.
So the problem is that our language is so bad that,
um, all these terms that we have,
we borrow from what's called folk wisdom or folk psychology, you know,
they they've come through the ages.
And this is true in every aspect of science that you have folk
terms, you know, folk physics becomes real physics.
And then the folk stuff goes away. Folk biology becomes real biology. And the,
you know, the folk stuff goes way, but in psychology,
the folk stuff never goes away because we always experience
the folk aspect of it. When we have a conscious experience,
that's what our conscious minds is.
Our folk psychology of ourselves and of others and of other animals.
But the, um, um,
underneath that is the part that we can get rid of the folk psychology
of, because we can understand how behavior is control,
how these physiological responses are controlled. And it ain't because,
you know, we've had fear is causing it, you know, but, but when you're afraid,
you're almost always running from the bear and feeling fear. But,
and, and so you assume that when you're running from the bear,
fear is what causes you to run. But fear is not the answer.
Fear is your awareness, that all that is happening to you.
Mm. But also the,
the ability to conate the consequences, right? Yeah. Yeah.
Like this bear's gonna get, I mean, he's gonna.
Yeah. Enhance. So it's all, that's all, you know,
one interpretation after another running forward.
But no self, no fear. That's no pop possible either. Right?
Well it, no, I mean, you need the self to be afraid. Yeah. So, I mean,
that's your, and to be consciously afraid,
but you can react to danger without the self. And that's what, you know,
that's key. You, you find yourself freezing or walking in New York city,
you jump back and the bus goes flying by. So you've reacted to danger, but,
but only afterwards,
do you feel fear when you cognitively become aware that that's.
Happened well, in that sort of a situation,
but in a situation like where you're walking down a dark alley and then you see
some guy who seems to be following you. Yeah. You're like, oh.
Boy. Yeah. So now you're,
you're in a situation where you're in a potentially dangerous situation. Right.
So now you're anxious about what's gonna happen. Yeah.
So you're not starting with, fearre starting with anxiety,
worry about what's gonna happen. Nothing. There's nothing there that's made you.
But then what if he ramps it up? It says, Hey, Joe. Yeah.
Why don't you come over here, man? I like to borrow some money from you. Yeah.
You're like, oh. Now it's fear is that fair.
Now you've got a specific threat. Right. And yeah. So you,
now you're into fear and then that's gonna morph into another anxiety about what
the hell is this guy gonna do to me. Right. So, but all of that, you know,
the, the dark alleyway is gonna go into your brain and trigger
your muscle, tension, your heart, to race and so forth.
And the dark gal is gonna go to your cortex and you're gonna be interpreting
the fact that you're in a dark alley and your heart is racing in terms of being
anxious and fearful and all of that. But they're happening separately.
It's not one bundle. It's like separate things in the brain.
And once we understand that it becomes, I think, a much easier problem,
how to approach problems of fear and anxiety.
You've gotta separately treat the behavior and the physiology from the conscious
thoughts. And in between those two,
you also gotta change the cognitions that underlie, uh, the,
the conscious experience, but also the cognitions can trigger behavior.
So, you know, one of the things we've, uh, we've pro proposed, uh,
I proposed this in my last book. Uh,
anxious was a kind of test program for exploring this where, uh,
it would be kind of a three part, uh, three step program. Um, first you would,
um, you'd have to do it with something simple,
like a spiderobic a what spiderobbic or snakeobbic. Oh, okay.
You would do exposure therapy, subliminally.
That means you subliminally present the picture of a snake or the spider
so fast, the conscious mind doesn't know it's there. So like.
Those old, uh, hungry eat popcorn things. Yeah, exactly. Yeah. Have.
The movies. Okay. Yeah. And.
That's a very common technique in psychology.
So they would show you a film and there'd be one or two frames of a spider if
you had a rock.
Or just a picture, you know, art, but could be a film. Yeah. Okay. And, uh,
but it would have to go very fast in the film. So it would,
so with a picture you'd just present it really quickly. And, um,
because you know, normally if you show a spiderobic, uh,
try to do exposure therapy,
they don't wanna do it cause they don't want to deal with spiders, but they,
they, their conscious mind doesn't know what's happening,
cuz it's going through subliminally.
So the Amy amygdala is being tamed by the exposure.
And now they can look at the picture are without, you know,
the body Rere reacting. They're not jumping, they're not, uh,
their heart isn't racing because the amygdala has been turned off.
So all those body responses have, have calmed down.
So now the person can kind of go some undergo,
some cognitive change about looking at spiders and so forth. And then finally,
once you've done those two steps,
the brain's ready for talk therapy and meditation and other kinds of
mindfulness approaches, uh, because all of the,
the impediments to all that have been put aside by this, these first two steps.
So has anybody ever like officially cured someone ofachnophobia or fiiofil
offiiophobia or, you know, fear of snakes or spiders,
like those are those seem to be almost like deep seated genetic fears.
Well, they, we, I mean our ancestors yes. Had, uh, snake and, but.
They vary. Right. Which is what's weird.
Our ancestors certainly experienced venomous snakes. Right. And,
but there's something about some people of,
of almost illogical reaction to it that it's often been speculated that this is
some sort of a genetic memory of someone perhaps in their ancestry line,
surviving a snake attack or losing someone to a snake.
It's more, you know, it turns out that the, um,
it's more about the ability to rapidly learn about those kinds of dangers
than to innately respond. Mm.
So there seems to be it's called prepared learning.
So you have an evolutionarily based thing that's with you that everyone has some
version of, but you know, it varies from individual to individual.
And then some people, um,
are prone to rapidly learn that either
because of other experiences or because of their particular genetic makeup.
And so they tend to go down the road of,
of acquiring these kinds of phobias now.
So it's the problem with treating that by just extinguishing it,
uh, through exposure is that the, um, uh, extinction is always imermanent.
You know, if you, once you've been reduced, nothing is wrong.
This is true in a rat or person. Let's say the rat has been given a tone,
that's been paired to the shop and then adheres the tone 20 or 30 times stops
responding. But then if it goes back in the,
the room or the chamber where the shock had occurred, the tone will again,
bring it, you know, I elicicited,
and the spiderphobic returns to the place where he,
or she was bitten by a spider or a place where spider is supposed to be present.
It can come back. So these are imperfect temporary solutions.
They're not enough. Um, and, uh, that's why, I mean, they're called,
uh, these are called, you know, reinstatement and, um,
things like that because they, they pop back up.
So maybe medications can helptamp that it down a bit. So,
uh, medications are useful in,
in that sense of being able to control the behavior and the physiology,
but less so in terms of changing the mental state, because, you know,
how could you possibly design a medication that would know how to change the
content of a, a mental state? I mean,
that seems like an impossible task and that's what you want to do.
You don't wanna change all mental states, right?
You wanna change the one content, you know, I'm afraid of spiders.
Yeah. Uh, it's,
it's so fascinating though,
how people vary so widely in their,
their reaction to certain fears or certain things that could induce fear,
whether it's dogs or, you know, whatever irrational thing that people have.
The, the source of that is really often
speculated that there's like some sort of a genetic component to it.
Do you buy into that? So.
Let's say, let's say that, that, you know,
in any kind of situation like that,
there are multiple systems in the brain that are gonna be involved.
We're gonna isolate the Amy amygdala as, you know,
hypothetical part of that system that is detecting and responding to
the stimulus.
So we're gonna go into the Amy amygdala and focus on one little part.
It, uh, called the lateral nucleus. That doesn't matter,
but it's the part that gets the input from the outside world.
So that is the gateway into the Amy amyglin. So now let's talk about,
let's say it's got, I don't know, a hundred thousand cells and neurons, um,
and, um, each of those neurons,
it's gonna have a bell curve
that's based on the genes that made that cell and whatever
kinds of electrical signals it's had throughout the life of the organism.
So you're gonna have a hundred thousand bell curves, you know,
various degrees that when ulus comes in those cells, that,
that are activated,
their little bell curves are gonna determine how much they respond to that.
And that's gonna propagate to other cells that have their own bell curves in
areas. And so on down the line,
that what happens at the level of behavior
is a very complicated, uh,
kind of summation of all those bell curves of all those cells
that happen to be activated. So it's not like, you know,
one thing is programmed. It's not like a brain areas program.
It's all about what's happened at those specific cells,
both through genetics and experience.
So we often kind of oversimplify things by thinking, well, there's a,
a gene or an area that has, um, inherited that. Then.
<Silence>.